# MGT 4250 Spring 2024 Course Project
Author: Alexander Sonnier (asonnier@elon.edu)

Link to the Tableau Public Application:
https://public.tableau.com/views/DataVisualizationProjectSocioeconomicStatusoftheUnitedStates/VerticalBarPlot?:language=en-US&:sid=&:display_count=n&:origin=viz_share_link

This **repository** is for the course project of MGT 4250 at Elon University.

## Project Description
### Questions of Interest
- Do cities/states with gentrified/poorer areas have a lower economic status compared to other cities?
- Does a specific sector of business affect the socioeconomic status and livability of a community?
- Does a certain race, population, or education attainment of the population indicate a certain socioeconomic status in the United States?

### Statements of Importance
These questions are *especially* **important** for understanding these visualizations because: 
1. Big, metropolitan cities like New York City or Chicago have a high homeless population with little room for external housing and limited job opportunities for this population. It also causes extra resources to be diverted away from developing more career opportunities and infrastructure to facilitate better business and bring in more money for these areas. For example, “unsheltered homelessness is particularly high in California at about 68% compared to 24% of the rest of the nation” (Wurden, 2018). The US Interagency Council on Homelessness also says that”’homelessness is costly to society because people experiencing homelessness frequently require the most expensive publicly-funded services and institutions’” (Wurden, 2018). Homelessness, especially over the past couple of years, has become too rampant and being able to find the specific areas where it is the most rampant through Data Visualization will be able to address and find the most effective way to divert money and resources effectively.

2. Some parts of the country are known for one or two industries they specialize in like Lafatyette, Louisiana, being known for extracting and selling oil. The type of industry in a city will also influence what people and businesses will be attracted to developing the city’s general economy. For example, the types of companies that will have the strongest impact on economic growth are high-value industries like “speciality manufacturing companies, consulting firms, and software businesses” (Endeavor Insight, 2019). These jobs could also be able to bring in revenue from other locations outside the main city and create more knowledge-intensive jobs. Another type of company cities should bring in are Entrepreneurial companies, since “businesses with local founders reinvest a greater share of their sales into the regions where they are based”, being able to create more jobs and grow the local economy as a result (Endeavor Insight, 2019). Examples of these places would include Silicon Valley in California, which has lots of tech companies and startups hosted like Google, AMD, Apple, Nvidia, HP, Meta, and the Research Triangle between Raleigh, Durham, and Chapel Hill, North Carolina that is becoming the Silicon Valley of the East Coast. This could be interesting to look towards within my research and data gathering process.

3. It answers an important point about how a community has grown and the economic status of it as well. For example, if a population from a gentrified area only has the education level up to a high school diploma, that would limit the job development for an area to lower paying and lower skill level jobs, meaning there is limited growth economically for that area. This would result in less housing development and less infrastructure for the area and a higher amount of people would be unemployed as well. I was able to incorporate the question and data into 3 Tableau visualizations that I feel are able to answer the questions I laid out.

## Data Description & Upload
For this project, I will attempt to answer these three questions utilizing data found on data.gov and the US Bureau of Labor Statistics. Based on what was answered from the initial questions, I was able to find data, including: 

- **Data.gov**: I found my data through searching for the “Socioeconomic Status in the United States”. The dataset I was able to find was named “Country-level Data Sets” from the Data.gov website. Then, under the Web page with links to Excel Files, I clicked download and downloaded the file named “Unemployment and Median Household Income for the US States and Countries, 1970-2022”. Then, I also downloaded the “Educational Attainment for Adults Age 25 and Older for the U.S., States, and Counties, 1970-2021”. For this initial data, I then delete the descriptions of the data to make it read correctly in Tableau.

- **U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics**: I found this set of data through searching for the “amount of people working in each industry in the United States excel file”. The first link is to the Employment by major industry sector by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, which you are able to download the dataset by clicking on the XLSX link under the available formats on the top left of the chart. In order to clean up the dataset, I copied the rows of data in the original excel file of only the industries instead of the headers and pasted it into a new excel file.

### Data Columns Used
Figure 1 (Symbol Map of Unemployment Rate by State):
- State or State Abbreviation of each State and County in the United States (Dimension).
- Unemployment_rate_2022 (Measure in Percentage): The average unemployment rate, in percentage, for the states and counties for the state in the United States in 2022.

Figure 2 (Vertical Bar Plot of People with a High School Diploma Only and a Bachelor's Degree or Higher by State, 2017-2021):
- State or State Abbreviation for each State in the United States (Dimension).
- High School Diploma Only 2017-2021 (Measure): The amount of people in the United States per state and county who have only gotten a High School Diploma from 2017-2021.
- Bachelor’s Degree or Higher 2017-2021 (Measure): The amount of people in the United States per state and county that have earned a Bachelor's Degree or Higher at an accredited institution from 2017-2021.

Figure 3 (Scatter Plot of Employment in 2012 versus Relative Change of Employment from 2012-2022): 
- Employment 2012: The number of people employed across a series of industries in the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics in 2012.
- Industry Sector: Label of the Industry Sectors in the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics database.
- Relative Change: The relative average change, in percentage, standarized across the industries from the US Bureau of Labor Statistics database from 2012-2022.

## Interpretating Visualizations
1st Visualization (Symbol Map): 

  The symbol map can answer my question because when determining the status of an socioeconomic status for an area, one important characteristic to consider is the unemployment percentage by each state. By seeing the actual percentages for unemployment based on the state, this allows you to link each region to specific education levels within each state and region. Further research could look more closely at specific regional bases like the Research Triangle and Silicon Valley and look at other factors that could be affecting the unemployment for a state like what industry is predominantly seen, outside factors like COVID-19 affecting unemployment and worker satisfaction all over the United States, and the predominant race that is a part of that specific region that could affect the number of available jobs in that area.

2nd Visualization (Vertical Bar Plot): 

  The vertical bar plot is important because I believe that looking at education is a good indicator for seeing the socioeconomic status of a state and area. By being able to compare the amount of people that have gotten a High School Diploma compared to a Bachelor's degree, this will be a good predictor for what types of industries decide to invest into an area and the state of a community. This chart will allow me to do further research on specific states that reveal some interesting data like looking at states with technology hubs (Research Triangle in North Carolina and Silicon Valley in California, for example) and find out why these places are able to get lots of employees and work. For example, states like California, Texas, and New York not only have a lot of well-known universities like Stanford University, Texas A&M, and  Columbia University, but they also have a great and smart population that was able to assimilate and gather lots of “smart” jobs on the rise like Lawyers, Software Developers, and Business Analysts. Another thing that could be further researched is seeing the breakdown of the employment of industries based on other factors like race or marital status and determining where support needs to be enacted based on those findings.

3rd Visualization (Scatter Plot): 

   The scatter plot is important to answering my questions because this chart allows me to break down some important industries from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics like Manufacturing, Healthcare and Social Assistance; and Transportation. The other two charts were dealing with the populations, unemployment rates, and the type of education the general population have. This chart allows me to see more specifics about industries and their relationships in terms of R-Squared, P-Value, and seeing the correlation between two like variables.  Further analysis reveals that the two variables (Employment in 2012 and the Relative Change in Employment from 2012 to 2022) chosen are not statistically significant with a high P-Value and a low R-Squared value. This reveals that there could be better predictors for predicting the amount of employees and their change across a certain period of time in an industry. From the data, it is revealed that industries like the Professional and Business Services and Transportation and Warehousing had significantly changed over the past 10 years. This could be due to lots of different factors like for Transportation, the rise of rideshare apps like Uber and Lyft and public transportation being more important than ever in major metropolitan areas are major contributors for the Transportation increase. For the warehousing industry, the incredible rise of major online stores like Amazon, Newegg, and other online retailers can potentially contribute to this major increase as well as the advent increase for car manufacturers like Tesla needing more factories to meet the high demand their vehicles have in the electric vehicle space. Another reason could be the increased amount of workers in multiple warehouses to meet the ever increasing demand for major store chains like Target and Walmart across the United States. For Construction, more major metropolitan areas and companies are always going to be developing to expand their influence and develop more jobs as a result. However, an industry that has had a major decrease in relative change is the Mining industry. Some potential reasons for this decrease are that more car companies are developing more electric vehicles and are moving away from mining fossil fuels and accelerating Global Warming. Another reason is that the amount of environmental damage for an industry that is becoming less relevant the longer that the world is moving away from Fossil Fuels. 

## Discussion and Summary

### Article and Generative AI Responses

#### **Article: The Economic Geography of the United States**

The point of this article from the University of Michigan School of Economics is to examine the different industries that are all across the United States and connect them to different regions within the United States. The US has one of the largest economies in the world by GDP as well as the highest GDP per capita, which makes their economy well diversified. There are 7 different industries explored, including Financial, Technology, Entertainment, Government and Law, Media, Automotive, Healthcare, Natural Resources, and Agriculture, Farming, and Livestock. The Financial Industry is primarily located in the Northeastern region of the US, including New York City with Wall Street holding many of the biggest financial institutions like Goldman Sachs, JPMorgan Chase, and Citigroup. Most of it being the Financial center has been attributed to its geography because it’s located in an easily accessible harbor compared to Philadelphia and Boston and became the first port of entry for immigrants, leading to a population boom and it still is a major financial and commercial center of the East Coast. Technology is primarily located on the San Francisco Bay with Silicon Valley having Apple, Google, and Cisco. World War II and really good secondary education has contributed to the big increase of technology companies. The bay has become a historically significant base for the US Navy and the Navy asked for the assistance of Stanford and UC Berkeley, which led to the insane technology boom because of the insanely smart talent in both universities and resulted in lots of small startups, large tech companies, and wealth come to this part of the country. The Entertainment Industry is primarily in Los Angeles because of the magnitude of entertainment companies and celebrities in the city. It became an entertainment hub because of the geography, being located in a variety of different environments that allowed a variety of sets to be used and great weather. For Government and Law, it’s located in Washington DC where the federal government spent billions of dollars on employing millions of people in lots of different departments and was a centrally planned city between the North and South, historically. For Media, it’s split between Washington DC, San Francisco, and NYC because the news industry is split between New York and Washington with networks like CNN, the New York Times, and Fox to be economically and politically close to these cities. The social media industry is on the west coast due to being close to the Tech hub of Silicon Valley and the Entertainment Industry. For the Automotive Industry, it’s mainly located in Detroit because of historical and geographical ties. Detroit is already a manufacturing capitol and is located closely to the Great Lakes, allowing them access to good water-transportation routes. It is also located between Chicago and New York, two major automotive markets. Healthcare is predominantly located in Boston primarily because of the high level of education through their nationally recognized institutions like MIT and Harvard and great medical schools. For Natural Resources, they are primarily located in nearby cities where that natural resource is abundant like oil being located in Texas since it’s close to the Gulf of Mexico. The mining and steel industries are located in Pittsburgh and other Applichican cities. Finally, for Agriculture, Farming, and Livestock, it is distributed between California, the Midwest, Texas, and specific regions in the South. The specific ties of the farming industry in terms of the corporate side are tied to the larger cities of these regions as well. While this isn’t an exhaustive list of every industry ever across the United States, this is a good idea to start potentially seeing connections and cuckold be used to predict other factors like Socioeconomic Status and Unemployment Rates across the country. With the onset of COVID and transportation becoming more advanced and convenient for many industries, eventually, more regional diversification would be possible to do.


#### ChatGPT Responses

Questions and Answers (These responses were made with generative AI in ChatGPT): 
1. Do cities/states with gentrified/poorer areas have a lower economic status compared to other cities?
- The economic status of cities and states with gentrified or poorer areas can vary widely depending on a range of factors. While gentrification often brings investment and increased property values to certain neighborhoods, it can also lead to displacement and economic disparities within a city. 
- In some cases, cities with gentrified areas may see overall economic growth and increased prosperity, particularly in the areas that have been revitalized. However, this growth may not necessarily benefit all residents equally, and disparities between wealthier and poorer neighborhoods can persist or even widen. 
- On the other hand, cities with persistent poverty or areas experiencing decline may face economic challenges that impact their overall status. Factors such as job opportunities, access to education and healthcare, infrastructure investment, and government policies all play significant roles in determining the economic health of a city or state. 
- So, while gentrification and poverty can influence economic dynamics within cities, it's important to consider a range of factors when assessing their overall economic status.

2. Does a specific sector of business affect the socioeconomic status and livability of a community?
- Yes, the specific sectors of businesses present in a community can significantly affect its socioeconomic status and livability. Different industries can have varied impacts on factors such as employment opportunities, wages, housing affordability, access to goods and services, environmental quality, and overall community well-being.
For example:
a. High-Tech and Knowledge-Based Industries: Cities with a strong presence of high-tech and knowledge-based industries often experience economic growth, innovation, and higher wages. However, this can also lead to increased costs of living, gentrification, and disparities in wealth and opportunity.
b. Manufacturing and Industrial Sectors: Areas with a concentration of manufacturing and industrial businesses may provide stable employment opportunities for a large segment of the population. However, they can also face challenges such as environmental pollution and fluctuations due to global economic trends.
c. Service and Hospitality Industries: Communities reliant on service and hospitality industries, such as tourism and retail, may experience seasonal employment patterns and lower wages. However, these sectors also contribute to local economies and can provide entry-level job opportunities.
d. Healthcare and Education: Cities with strong healthcare and education sectors often enjoy higher levels of human capital, better health outcomes, and more stable employment. These industries can attract skilled workers and investment, contributing to overall prosperity.
e. Agriculture and Natural Resources: Rural communities dependent on agriculture and natural resource extraction may face economic challenges due to factors such as market fluctuations and environmental sustainability issues. However, these industries are vital for food security and can support local economies.
f. Finance and Real Estate: Presence of finance and real estate sectors can lead to economic growth, but may also contribute to income inequality and housing affordability issues, especially if speculative practices drive up property values.
- The mix of industries in a community shapes its economic landscape and can influence various aspects of livability, including access to amenities, social services, and opportunities for upward mobility. Sustainable development strategies often aim to diversify the economy and create a balance between different sectors to promote inclusive growth and enhance overall quality of life.

3. Does a certain race, population, or education attainment of the population indicate a certain socioeconomic status in the United States?
- Race, population demographics, and educational attainment are all factors that can strongly correlate with socioeconomic status in the United States, but they don't provide a complete picture on their own. Here's how each factor can intersect with socioeconomic status:
a. Race and Ethnicity: In the United States, racial and ethnic minorities, particularly Black and Hispanic populations, often face systemic barriers to economic opportunities, including employment discrimination, lower wages for the same work, and disparities in access to education and healthcare. As a result, these groups are more likely to experience poverty and lower socioeconomic status compared to white Americans. However, it's essential to recognize that socioeconomic status varies within racial and ethnic groups, and factors such as immigration status, geographic location, and historical context also play significant roles.
b. Population Demographics: The composition of a population, including factors such as age, household size, and immigration status, can influence its socioeconomic status. For example, communities with a high proportion of young people or single-parent households may face specific economic challenges related to childcare, education, and workforce participation. Similarly, areas with a large immigrant population may have unique socioeconomic dynamics related to language barriers, cultural integration, and access to social services.
c. Educational Attainment: Educational attainment is a strong predictor of socioeconomic status in the United States. Individuals with higher levels of education tend to have better job prospects, higher incomes, and greater access to opportunities for advancement. However, disparities in educational attainment persist along racial, ethnic, and socioeconomic lines, with marginalized communities often facing barriers such as inadequate funding for schools, lack of access to quality education, and systemic inequalities in the education system.
- While race, population demographics, and educational attainment are important indicators of socioeconomic status, they are interconnected with a complex array of factors, including income, wealth, employment, housing, healthcare, and social mobility. Addressing socioeconomic disparities requires comprehensive strategies that address systemic inequities and promote equal opportunities for all individuals and communities.

**Do my visualizations align well with the article and Generative AI responses?**



### Works Cited

Costa, N. (2021, March 9). The Economic Geography of the United States. Michigan Journal of Economics. https://sites.lsa.umich.edu/mje/2021/03/09/the-economic-geography-of-the-united-states/

Julia von Wurden, C. (2018, May 1). The impact of homelessness on economic competitiveness. American Security Project. https://www.americansecurityproject.org/impact-homelessness-economic-competitiveness/

Pablo Sabillon, J. (2019, June 7). What types of companies have the strongest impact on economic growth?. Entrepreneurship Ecosystem Insights. http://www.ecosysteminsights.org/what-types-of-companies-have-the-strongest-impact-on-economic-growth/

Publisher Economic Research Service, Department of Agriculture. (2024, January 3). Department of Agriculture - County-Level Data Sets. Catalog. https://catalog.data.gov/dataset/county-level-data-sets

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2023, September 6). Employment by Major Industry Sector. U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. https://www.bls.gov/emp/tables/employment-by-major-industry-sector.ht
